Query tuning revamp (#24667)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/explore/query-1-performance/pg-stats.md

- **null_frac**: Fraction of NULL values in a column.
- **avg_width**: Average width (in bytes) of a column’s entries.
- **n_distinct**: Estimated number of distinct values in a column. Positive values are direct counts, while negative values indicate that the distinct count is a fraction of the total row count.
- **most_common_vals**: Most frequently occurring values in a column.
- **most_common_freqs**: Frequencies of the most common values.

To understand how to use these statistics to improve queries and data model, let's go over some examples.

## Setup

The examples run on any YugabyteDB universe.

<!-- begin: nav tabs -->
{{<nav/tabs list="local,anywhere,cloud" active="local"/>}}

{{<nav/panels>}}
{{<nav/panel name="local" active="true">}}
<!-- local cluster setup instructions -->
{{<setup/local numnodes="1" rf="1" >}}

{{</nav/panel>}}

{{<nav/panel name="anywhere">}} {{<setup/anywhere>}} {{</nav/panel>}}
{{<nav/panel name="cloud">}}{{<setup/cloud>}}{{</nav/panel>}}
{{</nav/panels>}}
<!-- end: nav tabs -->

For illustration, let us create a users table as:

```sql
CREATE TABLE users (
    id int,
    name VARCHAR,
    PRIMARY KEY(id)
);
```

> Let us add some specific data to this table so that we can corelate to it during analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add some specific data to this table to corelate to it during analysis.
```

```sql
-- set seed for random to be repeatable
SELECT setseed(0.5); -- to help generate the same random values

-- Insert 10,000 rows into the users table
INSERT INTO users (id, name)
SELECT
    id,
    CASE
        -- 40% NULL names
        WHEN random() < 0.4 THEN NULL
        -- 60% non-null names with skewed distribution
        ELSE (
            CASE
                -- 30% concentration of empty string
                WHEN random() < 0.5 THEN ''
                -- 9 names for the remaining 30%
                ELSE (ARRAY['Sam', 'Kim', 'Pat', 'Lee', 'Morgan',
                            'Taylor', 'Jordan', 'Casey', 'Jamie']
                )[floor(random() * 9 + 1)::int]
            END
        )
    END AS name
FROM generate_series(1, 10000) AS id;
```

> Run analyze to gather statistics on the column values of the table as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run ANALYZE to gather statistics on the column values of the table as follows:
```

```sql
ANALYZE users;
```

> Also turn ON extended display for better readability as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, turn ON extended display for better readability as follows:
```

```sh
@yugabyte=> \x ON
```

## Fetching the statistics

> Once the ANALYZE command is run, the `pg_statistic` command is populated with the statistics of the data. These stats are made easily readbable via the pg_stats view. For example, you can view the statistics of the `name` column in the `users` table as,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the ANALYZE command is run, the pg_statistic command is populated with the statistics of the data. These statistics are made easily readbable via the pg_stats view. For example, you can view the statistics of the `name` column in the `users` table as follows:
```

```sql
SELECT attname, null_frac, n_distinct, most_common_vals, most_common_freqs
    FROM pg_stats
    WHERE tablename='users' AND attname='name';
```

> You should get an output similar to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should get an output similar to the following:
```

```caddyfile{.nocopy}
-[ RECORD 1 ]-----+------------------------------------------------------------------------
attname           | name
null_frac         | 0.4042
n_distinct        | 10
most_common_vals  | {"",Jordan,Jamie,Morgan,Taylor,Kim,Pat,Casey,Sam,Lee}
most_common_freqs | {0.2963,0.0352,0.0346,0.0342,0.0339,0.0334,0.0333,0.0328,0.0313,0.0308}
```

> The above output says that,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the above output,
```

- **null_frac** shows that the fraction of null values is about 40%. (_Remember_, we tried to insert about 40% NULL values)
- **n_distinct** shows that there are about 10 distinct values in the name column
- **most_common_vals** shows the most commonly occuring values (other than NULL)
- **most_common_freqs** shows the frequency in which the most common values occur. For example, Empty value occurs at 29.6%, John occurs at 3.0% and so on.

## Partial indexes

> Now when we try to create an index on the column `name`, the index could be unevenly distributed. This is due to 40% of the dataset consisting of NULL values and 30% consisting of empty values. Only 30% consist valid values. If we know that our queries will not lookup NULL or empty values, we can create partial index as,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, when you try to create an index on the column `name`, the index could be unevenly distributed. This is due to 40% of the dataset consisting of NULL values, and 30% consisting of empty values. Only 30% consist valid values. If you know that your queries will not lookup NULL or empty values, you can create a partial index as follows:
```

```sql
CREATE INDEX idx_users_name_nonempty
    ON users (name)
    WHERE name IS NOT NULL AND name <> '';
```

The above index will have just the valid values and the index will not be skewed.

## Cardinality

> Given that there are only 9 (via **n_distinct**) distinct valid (without empty string) values in the `name` column, on an index with HASH distribution, even if there are more nodes in the cluster, the index will end up being only on a maximum of 9 nodes. This is because each value is hashed to determine the tablet in which it should be stored and there will be only 9 distinct hashes. This is the reason why is not advisable to create indexes on low cardinality columns like Booleans (2), Days of week(7) etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given that there are only 9 (via **n_distinct**) distinct valid (without empty string) values in the `name` column, and the index uses HASH distribution,  it will be distributed across a maximum of 9 nodes, regardless of how many nodes are in the cluster. This is because each value is hashed to determine the tablet it is stored in, leading to only 9 distinct hashes. This is why creating indexes on columns with low cardinality, like Booleans (2 values) or Days of the week (7 values), and so on is not recommended.
```

## Skewed data

> It is always advisable for your index/table to be reasonably distributed so that all nodes in your cluster handle a reasonably equal share of queries. In the above data set, it is easy to see that together `NULL` and empty values account for 70% of the total data set (via **most_common_vals, null_frac**). And the valid names constitute only 30% of the dataset. If an index was created will all these values then all queries to the index will be handled only by about 30% of the nodes in the cluster as 70% of data would not be queried against.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is always advisable for your index/table to be reasonably distributed so that all nodes in your cluster process a similar amount of queries. In the above data set, `NULL` and empty values make up 70% of the total dataset (via **most_common_vals, null_frac**), with valid names only accounting for 30%.  If you create an index on this data, only approximately 30% of the nodes will handle most of the queries, as 70% of the data is not queried.
```

## Setup

The examples run on any YugabyteDB universe.

<!-- begin: nav tabs -->
{{<nav/tabs list="local,anywhere,cloud" active="local"/>}}

{{<nav/panels>}}
{{<nav/panel name="local" active="true">}}
<!-- local cluster setup instructions -->
{{<setup/local numnodes="1" rf="1" >}}

{{</nav/panel>}}

{{<nav/panel name="anywhere">}} {{<setup/anywhere>}} {{</nav/panel>}}
{{<nav/panel name="cloud">}}{{<setup/cloud>}}{{</nav/panel>}}
{{</nav/panels>}}
<!-- end: nav tabs -->

Create a users table:

```sql
CREATE TABLE users (
    id int,
    name VARCHAR,
    employed BOOLEAN,
    PRIMARY KEY(id)
);
```

Add some data to your table so that you can correlate it during analysis.

```sql
-- set seed for random to be repeatable
SELECT setseed(0.5); -- to help generate the same random values

-- Insert 10,000 rows into the users table
INSERT INTO users (id, name, employed)
SELECT
    id,
    CASE
        -- 40% NULL names
        WHEN random() < 0.4 THEN NULL
        -- 60% non-null names with skewed distribution
        ELSE (
            CASE
                -- 30% concentration of empty string

>                 WHEN random() < 0.5 THEN ''

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                WHEN random() < 0.3 THEN ''
```

Reviewer: suggestion is because of the comment - -- 30% concentration of empty string

Author: The comment is correct. 40% NULLs & 60% non-NULLs. of the 60% 50% is empty string which is 30% of the total.

most_common_freqs | {0.2963,0.0352,0.0346,0.0342,0.0339,0.0334,0.0333,0.0328,0.0313,0.0308}
```

The preceding output shows the following:

- **null_frac** shows that the fraction of null values is about 40%. (Recall that you tried to insert about 40% NULL values.)
- **n_distinct** shows that there are about 10 distinct values in the name column.
- **most_common_vals** shows the most commonly occurring values (other than NULL).
- **most_common_freqs** shows the frequency with which the most common values occur. For example, Empty value occurs at 29.6%, Jordan occurs at 3.5%, and so on.

## Partial indexes

If you were to try to create an index on the column `name`, the index could be unevenly distributed. This is because 40% of the dataset consists of NULL values, and 30% consists of empty values, with only 30% being valid values. If you know that your queries will not look up NULL or empty values, you can create a partial index as follows:

```sql
CREATE INDEX idx_users_name_nonempty
    ON users (name)
    WHERE name IS NOT NULL AND name <> '';
```

This index will include only the valid values and as a result won't be skewed.

## Cardinality

> If you fetch the stats on the `id` and `employed` columns as,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you fetch the statistics on the `id` and `employed` columns as follows:
```

```sql
SELECT attname, null_frac, n_distinct, most_common_vals, most_common_freqs
    FROM pg_stats
    WHERE tablename='users' AND attname IN ('id', 'employed');
```

> You will get an output like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will get an output similar to the following:
```

Ideally, your index/table should be reasonably distributed so that the nodes in the cluster process a similar amount of queries. Using pg_stats, you can quickly determine that empty names are about 30% of the dataset. If you create an index on this `name` that includes empty values, all the empty values will be one single node. Any queries for empty names will go to that one node. Depending on your usecase, this may or may not be ideal. In such scenarios you can consider a composite index involving more than one column.

## Composition of arrays

Similar to how pg_stats reports common values, it also reports commonly occurring elements and their respective frequencies within array data types in the `most_common_elems` column. For example, consider a table that stores the labels that movies are tagged with:

```sql
CREATE TABLE labels (
    id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    tags TEXT[]
);

INSERT INTO labels (tags) VALUES
    (ARRAY['romance', 'comedy', 'action']),
    (ARRAY['romance', 'action']),
    (ARRAY['romance', 'thriller']),
    (ARRAY['comedy', 'thriller']),
    (ARRAY['action', 'thriller']);
```

Now, run ANALYZE on the above table as follows:

```sql
ANALYZE labels;
```

> You can fetch the stats for the elements as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can fetch the statistics for the elements as follows:
```

```sql
SELECT attname, most_common_elems, most_common_elem_freqs FROM pg_stats WHERE tablename = 'labels' AND attname = 'tags';
```

You should see an output similar to the following:

```caddyfile{.nocopy}
-[ RECORD 1 ]----------+---------------------------------
attname                | tags
most_common_elems      | {action,comedy,romance,thriller}
most_common_elem_freqs | {0.6,0.4,0.6,0.6,0.4,0.6,0}
```

> This indicates that action appears in 60% of the records (3 in this case) and comedy in 40% of the records (2 here), providing insight into the data distribution. Notice that there are 4 entries in the most_common_elems field but 7 entries in most_common_elem_freqs. The first 4 values correspond to the frequencies of the 4 most common elements, followed by the minimum and maximum element frequencies, with the last value representing the frequency of NULLs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This indicates that action appears in 60% of the records (3 in this case) and comedy in 40% of the records (2 here), providing insight into the data distribution. Notice that there are 4 entries in the `most_common_elems` field but 7 entries in `most_common_elem_freqs`. The first 4 values correspond to the frequencies of the 4 most common elements, followed by the minimum and maximum element frequencies, with the last value representing the frequency of NULLs.
```
